---
type: "web-article"
authors: "Philip E. Agre"
title: "How to Be a Leader in Your Field: A Guide for Students in Professional Schools"
container: "Web Site"
year: "2005"
issue: ""
volume: ""
pages: ""
subjects: "Career"
doi: ""
link: "https://polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/pagre/leader.html"
citationkey: "Agre2005"
updated: "20160311"
---

####Notes
True leaders of a field are the thought leaders, the people who "synthesize the thinking of the profession's members and articulate directions for the future." These days, in a knowledge profession every person must behave as a leader of this type. The recipe is:

1. Pick an issue 
2. Do a project to study that issue
3. Talk to relevant people about the issue
4. Pull together all the information you've gathered and define a scope.
5. Circulate the result
6. Build on your work, developing groups, papers, mailing lists, etc...

If the issue fizzles, find another and start over. You should always have at least one issue that you are working on.

Agre has many suggestions as to how to develop an issue:

1. Talk to current leaders and notice patterns in what they say.
2. Talk to people in your school, especially the people that are excited.
3. Talk to people in other professions to see either (1) what problems exist in their field that you could apply your field to solve, or (2) what problems exist in your field that you could apply their field to solve. Alternatively, identify distinct resources that you bring with you and aren't being applied in your field yet.
4. Pick a topic in your profession that you hope to work on one day, and read about other fields. Translate that topic into a topic and language that your field can use.
5. Abstract one of your profession's functions and apply the abstraction to several new areas.
6. Talk to people who use your profession's products and services. What needs do they have now and what needs will they have in five years?
7. Learn the arguments that your field leaders use at budget time. Devise new arguments that people with money will understand. Discuss these arguments with others and improve them.
8. Assemble a group and brainstorm new ways your profession could provide products and services.
9. Draw on your own experiences to articulate an issue that no one else is talking about.
10. Cultivate your ability to be interested in things. With every new thing, google it, see what your profession is saying about it, and have a conversation with someone who knows about it.
11. Ask what issues are archaic and how you could reform them.
12. Write down all the difficulties that occur in your profession. Make theories about what causes those difficulties, the bigger the better. Elaborate on them and use them to generate ideas for changes.
13. Ask what a big fashion is right now, and what the fashion edits out of reality. Identify the valuable aspects of current fashion and merge them with the parts that are being left out.
14. Learn about a new family of technologies that will have big consequences for your field. This should be a broad category like nanotech. More generally, cultivate a method for knowing what new research is in the pipeline, so that you can examine the issues that will become important.
15. Look at the history of the profession and identify forces that have continually caused change. Imagine what will happen if that force becomes even stronger. Think about how to address or take advantage of that change.
16. Is a new sub-group evolving in your profession that has different interests?
17. Look at who is entering programs now as compared to 20 years ago. What is different? What values distinguish them? Do the juniors have some issues that have not really been clarified?
18. Identify groups that have commonalities but aren't working together and develop a common framework and set of goals.
19. What are the implications of broader intellectual trends that you agree with for your field?
20. Identify something that your field often does in a haphazard way and put an impressive name on it. Develop a theory that helps people do the thing in a more rational or structured way.
21. Work for someone who is currently engaged in very dynamic innovative work.
22. Collect ides from people who have novel ones. Combine them with your own in new ways.
23. How do people learn new things and how can they do them better?
24. Identify global trends and think about their impact on your profession.
25. What is the real purpose of your profession? What would be a very different way of achieving that purpose than is currently done?
26. What is your own personal thinking style or issue-discovering style? Invent a way of working that amplifies that for you.