---
layout: mathpost
type: course
title: "Solow Growth Model" 
course: "Macroeconomics I"
---

Growth defined as a function of capital and labor:

$$Y_t = F_t(K_t, L_t) = F(K_t, A_tL_t)$$

$$K$$ is capital,

$$L$$ is labor,

$$A$$ is productivity of labor.

The assumption that lets us get from $$F_t$$ to $$F$$ is that $$A_t$$ is the only source of variation in $$F_t$$. By adding it, $$F_t$$ becomes a fixed function of $$K$$, $$L$$, and $$A$$. This requires that $$F_t$$ is linear, s.t. $$F(2K,2L) = 2F(K,L)$$ (constant returns to scale, or CRS).

$$A$$ can vary by $$\gamma$$, with $$A_0 = 1$$, so that $$A_t = \gamma^t A_0$$ = \gamma^t$$.

Similarly, $$L_t = \gamma^t_l L_0 = \gamma_L L_{t-1}$$, so the rate of growth of both $$A$$ and $$L$$ is constant.

Then define $$K_{t+1} = (1-\delta)K_t + I_t$$, where $$I_t$$ is investment.

Then $$Y_t = F(K_t, A_t L_t) = (\gamma \gamma_L)^t F(\frac{K_t}{\gamma \gamma_L)^t, L_0)$$.

We want to ensure that our model approaches a steady state. That is, it converges asymptotically.

$$Y_t$$ grows at $$\gamma \gamma_L$$, so $$K_t = (\gamma \gamma_L)^t K_0$$ and $$I_t = (\gamma \gamma_L)^t Y_0$$.

The model has a steady state if we assume $$I_t = sY_t$$, for some $$s \in (0,1)$$.

So the complete system has three equations:

1. $$C_t + I_t = Y_t = F(K_t, L)$$ (Production function)
2. $$K_{t+1} = (1-\delta)K_t + I_t$$ (Capital accumulation function)
3. $$I_t = sY_t$$ (Investment Rule)

Subtituting (3) into (2), we get $$K_{t+1} = (1-\delta)K_t + sY_t$$, which is the law of motion of capital. This equation has a fairly intuitive interpretation: capital in the next time period is equal to capital in this time period plus investment less depreciation.

If we assume $$F(K,L)$$ is concave and we have CRS, then:

$$F(0,L) = 0$$

$$F_K (0,L) > \frac{\delta}{s}$$

$$\lim_{K \to \infty} F(K,L) + (1-\delta) < 1$$

### Cobb-Douglas

Given a production function $$F(K,AL) = K^\alpha AL^{1-\alpha}$$.

We can check CRS: 

$$\begin{split}
F(cK,cAL) &= (cK)^\alpha (cAL)^{1-\alpha} \\
&= c^\alpha c^{1-\alpha} K^\alpha (AL)^{1-\alpha} \\
&= cF(K,AL)$$

In the steady state, $$I = \delta K$$, so 


