---
layout: mathpost
type: course
title: "Syllabus" 
course: "Everything is Fucked"
---

This course is an informal study following the excellent and hilarious [PSY 607: Everything is Fucked](https://hardsci.wordpress.com/2016/08/11/everything-is-fucked-the-syllabus/) by Sanjay Srivastava ([@hardsci](https://twitter.com/hardsci)). 

The class has a [github repository](https://github.com/potterzot/everything-is-fucked). Feel free to contribute!

Discussion of the readings happens in a public etherpad linked in each week.

#### Week 1: Psychology is fucked

* Meehl, P. E. (1990). Why summaries of research on psychological theories are often uninterpretable. Psychological Reports, 66, 195-244.

[Discussion etherpad](https://public.etherpad-mozilla.org/p/everything-is-fucked-week1)

#### Week 2: Significance testing is fucked

* Cohen, J. (1990). Things I have learned (so far). American Psychologist, 45, 1304-1312.

* Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Verhagen, J., Province, J. M., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2016). Is there a free lunch in inference? Topics in Cognitive Science, 8, 520-547.

#### Week 3: Causal inference from experiments is fucked

* Chapter 3 from: Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New York: Wiley.

#### Week 4: Mediation is fucked

* Bullock, J. G., Green, D. P., & Ha, S. E. (2010). Yes, but what’s the mechanism?(don’t expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 550-558.

#### Week 5: Covariates are fucked

* Culpepper, S. A., & Aguinis, H. (2011). Using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with fallible covariates. Psychological Methods, 16, 166-178.

* Westfall, J., & Yarkoni, T. (2016). Statistically controlling for confounding constructs is harder than you think. PloS one, 11, e0152719.

#### Week 6: Replicability is fucked

* Pashler, H., & Harris, C. R. (2012). Is the replicability crisis overblown? Three arguments examined. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 531-536.

* Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science, 349(6251), aac4716.

#### Week 7: Interlude: Everything is fine, calm the fuck down

* Gilbert, D. T., King, G., Pettigrew, S., & Wilson, T. D. (2016). Comment on “Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science.” Science, 251, 1037a.

* Maxwell, S. E., Lau, M. Y., & Howard, G. S. (2015). Is psychology suffering from a replication crisis? What does “failure to replicate” really mean? American Psychologist, 70, 487-498.

#### Week 8: Scientific publishing is fucked

* Fanelli, D. (2011). Negative results are disappearing from most disciplines and countries. Scientometrics, 90, 891-904.

* Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med, 2, e124.

#### Week 9: Meta-analysis is fucked

* Inzlicht, M., Gervais, W., & Berkman, E. (2015). Bias-Correction Techniques Alone Cannot Determine Whether Ego Depletion is Different from Zero: Commentary on Carter, Kofler, Forster, & McCullough, 2015. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2659409 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2659409

* Van Elk, M., Matzke, D., Gronau, Q. F., Guan, M., Vandekerckhove, J., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2015). Meta-analyses are no substitute for registered replications: A skeptical perspective on religious priming. Frontiers in Psychology, 6.

#### Week 10: The scientific profession is fucked

* Bakker, M., van Dijk, A., & Wicherts, J. M. (2012). The rules of the game called psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 543-554.

* Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R., & Motyl, M. (2012). Scientific utopia II. Restructuring incentives and practices to promote truth over publishability. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 615-631.


