---
layout: mathpost
type: course
title: "Proofs" 
course: "Math Bootcamp"
---

Notes on proofs from: Richard Hammack. Book of Proofs, Virginia Commonwealth University, 2013.
Some notes also from: Simon and Blume. Mathematics for Economists. MIT Press, 2001.

## Direct Proofs

* **Theorems** are true statements that have been proved true, and generally follow the format "*If P, then Q*".
* Less significant theorems are sometimes called **propositions**.
* A **lemma** is a theorem that is mainly used to prove another theorem.
* A **corollary** is an immediate consequence of a theorem.

We can represent "If $$ P $$, then $$ Q $$" as $$ P \Rightarrow Q $$.

There are four possible results based on whether $$ P $$ and $$ Q $$ are true or false:

| $$ P $$ | $$ Q $$ | $$ P \Rightarrow Q $$ |
| :-----: | :-----: | :-------------------: |
| T | T | T |
| T | F | **F** |
| F | T | T |
| F | F | T |

So to prove $$ P \Rightarrow Q $$, we need to show that $$ P $$ being true *forces* $$ Q $$ to be true. 

___
**Example:**

> **Proposition**: If $$ x $$ is odd, then $$ x^2 $$ is also odd.
>
> *Proof*. Suppose $$ x $$ is odd. Then $$ x = 2a + 1 $$ for $$ a \in \mathbb{R} $$. If $$ x^2 $$ is also odd, then $$ x^2 = 2b + 1 $$ for some $$ b \in \mathbb{R} $$. Substituting, $$ x^2 = 2b + 1 = (2a + 1)^2 $$, so $$ b = \frac{(2a + 1)^2 - 1}{2} = 2a(a+1) $$. Thus $$ x^2 $$ is odd.

___

When $$ P $$ can take multiple values or multiple types of values, you may have to prove each case separately. For example to prove that $$ 1 + (-1)^n(2n - 1) $$ is a multiple of 4, you have to show that it is true both for $$ n $$ odd and $$ n $$ even.

Also, we can use the phrase "Without loss of generality..." to state suppositions for which the proof is nearly the same. For example, if $$ m $$ and $$ n $$ can be odd or even and id doesn't matter which is which, the proof can be done for just one set instead of repeating the same proof for the other set of values.


## Contrapositive Proofs
The contrapositive proof uses the fact that $$ P \Rightarrow Q $$ is equivalent to $$ !Q \Rightarrow !P $$.

___
**Example:**

> **Proposition**: Suppose $$ x \in \mathbb{Z} $$. If $$ 7x + 9 $$ is even, then $$ x $$ is odd.
> 
> *Proof*. Suppose $$ x $$ is not odd. Then $$ x $$ is even, so $$ x = 2a $$ for some $$ a \in \mathbb{Z} $$. Then $$ 7x + 9 = 7(2a) + 9 = 2(7a + 4) + 1 $$, so $$ 7x + 9 = 2b + 1 $$, where $$ b $$ is the integer $$ 7a + 4 $$. Hence $$ 7x + 9 $$ is odd and is not even.

___

**Congruent Integers** are integers $$ a $$ and $$ b $$ and $$ n \in \mathbb{N} $$, such that $$ n|(a - b) $$. We can also write this as $$ a \equiv b (mod n) $$. Then $$ a $$ and $$ b $$ are **congruent modulo n**, which means, among other things, that $$ a $$ and $$b$$ have the same remainder when divided by $$n$$. FOr example, $$ 11 \equiv 14 (mod 3) $$ because $$ 3|(11 - 14) $$. 11 and 14 both have remainder 2 when divided by 3.


